Figure 1. The logic and problems of paralogue rooting. In theory (A), two genes that arose from a single parent by duplication immediately prior to the common ancestor of the group under study should yield two identical trees joined together by a line (shown extra thick) between the roots (stars) of each tree. Letters are taxa. In practice (B), stochasticity and systematic biases in evolutionary modes and rates yield trees with partially incorrect topology and often-misplaced roots [1]. Misplaced branches (red) are shown as extra long, but in practice misplaced taxa often do not reveal themselves so neatly. In practice, root positions in paralogue subtrees may both be right (very rare: I recall no examples), both wrong but the same (implying strong systematic biases), both wrong but different (often reflecting stochasticity and poor resolution), or one right and one wrong. When such conflicts occur among different paralogue pairs (or triples, etc.), as is almost invariable, other means are required to decide between them.       
Figure 2. Evolutionary relationships among the four major kinds of cell. The horizontal red arrow indicates the position of the universal root as inferred from the first protein paralogue trees, i.e. between neomura and eubacteria. To determine whether the root is really there or within eubacteria, as suggested instead by many paralogue trees for metabolic enzymes, we must correctly polarize the direction of the negibacteria/posibacteria transition that took place in bacteria that had already evolved flagella. As argued in detail in the text, flagellar evolution and wall/envelope evolution both strongly favour a transition from negibacteria to posibacteria (continuous black arrow), not from posibacteria to negibacteria (broken red arrow). This places the root within Negibacteria and shows that the ancestral cell had two bounding membranes, not just one as traditionally assumed. A negibacterial root also fits the fossil record, which shows that Negibacteria are more than twice as old as eukaryotes [1, 129]. As negibacteria are the only prokaryotes that use sunlight to fix carbon dioxide this is also the only position that would have allowed the first ecosystems to have been based on photosynthesis, without which extensive evolution might have been impossible. Posibacteria, archaebacteria and eukaryotes were probably all ancestrally heterotrophs, whereas negibacteria are likely to have been ancestrally photosynthetic and diversified by evolving all the known types of photosystem and major antenna pigments.       
Figure 3. Key molecular cladistic characters that help root the tree of life. Green bars mark major evolutionary innovations. Those explained in detail in previous publications [1, 24, 26] are labelled in blue. Those introduced for the first time or discussed in more detail in the present paper are in red. The three most fundamental changes in cell structure (the origin of unibacteria by loss of the negibacterial outer membrane [1, 5]; the neomuran revolution involving novel chromatin and glycoprotein secretion and much coadaptive macromolecular evolution [1, 5, 29, 62]; and the origin of the eukaryote cell [5, 27, 62]) are marked by thicker bars. So also are the three major transitions, whose key importance and decisiveness for rooting the tree of life are explained here for the first time: the origins of the proteasome, of flagella, and of Omp85 for insertion of OM β-barrel proteins. The three major kinds of cell from the viewpoint of their having fundamentally distinct membrane topology (eukaryotes, unibacteria, negibacteria) [5, 29, 56, 62] are shown by thumbnail sketches (isoprenoid ether lipids in red, outer membranes in blue). Thumbnail sketches also illustrate the inferred times of origin of two key cylindrical macromolecular assemblies (the OM β-barrel protein Omp85 and HslVU/proteasome ATP-dependent regulated proteases) and the two-step increased complexity of the latter. Negibacterial taxa are shown in black, Posibacteria in orange, and neomuran taxa in brown. Gracilicutes comprise four negibacterial phyla with either a very thin peptidoglycan layer or no peptidoglycan at all in their cell envelope: Proteobacteria, Planctobacteria, Spirochaetae, Sphingobacteria (Table 1 explains the formal bacterial taxon names used here for precision and brevity). Evidence for the relatively late dating of the neomuran revolution was explained in detail previously [1]. Note that although Chlorobacteria and Endobacteria are shown as holophyletic, either or both might actually be paraphyletic; I suspect that Endobacteria may be paraphyletic as the most divergent actinobacterium has endospores, but think that Chlorobacteria are probably not. Conversely, it is uncertain whether actinobacteria are paraphyletic as shown or paraphyletic; see text – further work is needed to decide. For simplicity, five additional polarizations within Gracilicutes that are also discussed are not shown; see the more comprehensive Fig. 7 for them and additional characters mapped onto the tree. Note that the ~2.8 Gy date for the origin of cyanobacteria is based solely on hopanoid biomarkers; since no earlier organic deposits have been found that are sufficiently well preserved and with enough extractable hydrocarbons for such biomarker analysis, this is a minimum date (though its validity also depends on the assumption that such hydrocarbons have not migrated vertically in the rocks since being formed, which is hard to test).       
Figure 4. S`chematic longitudinal sections through the two-tier HslV and the four-tier bacterial 20S proteasome core particle. Red dots are proteolytic active centres. Thumbnail sketches on the left of the main figure are cross sections through the proteolytic chamber showing respectively their 6-fold and 7-fold symmetry. Evolution from the 12-mer HslV to the 28-mer proteasome by duplication to form α- and β-subunits forming heptameric rings is shown by the arrow; loss of proteolytic activity by the new α-subunit (black) coupled with a new ability to stack onto the β-subunits would have expanded the digestive cavity radially and longitudinally and kept potentially vulnerable external proteins further away from the proteolytic centres. Changed dimensions and shape of the α-subunits probably favoured replacement of the HslU ATPase ring by a different one. Hypothetical evolution in the reverse direction by loss of the α-subunits would have created a less efficient purely β-subunit 14-mer that might have lost any ability to bind an ATPase ring through adapting to α-subunit binding instead and with a broader digestive cavity and entry pore more likely to digest the wrong proteins. It is unlikely that it could have survived purifying selection long enough to reduce its symmetry to sixfold and find a new ATPase partner to bind and thus generate HslVU. No selective advantage for simplification of a proteasome to HslV is apparent. Subunit shapes simplified from [199].       
